---
title: Running Your GPA Server on a Virtual Machine
number: 12

date: 2020-11-10
due: 2020-11-12 08:00:00

layout: homework

published: false
---

# Homework {{page.number}}

For this homework, you will deploy your "MP5: GPA Calculator" onto a virtual machine!


## Step 0: Connecting to your VM 

An course virtual machine has been provided for you via Compass 2g (see the "VM Hostname" in the gradebook).  It has been configured to allow to login using your NetID and password.  Note that you **can only connect to this machine via an on-campus connection**.  There are many ways to get an on-campus connection:

- If you are on-campus or in a dorm, you're all set!
- If you are off-campus, you can use the [University of Illinois VPN software](https://techservices.illinois.edu/services/virtual-private-networking-vpn) to be "virtually" on-campus.

Once you're connected, you will want to use an SSH client (ex: `ssh` on OS X or `PuTTY` on Windows) to connect to your virtual machine.


## Step 1: Installing Python 3.9 on your VM

Your VM comes pre-installed with Python 3.5.1.  This version of Python is quite old and does not support modern features that we'd like to use.  To install a modern version of Python, Python 3.9, we can fetch it from a pre-compiled repository with the following four commands:

```
# Install python3.10:
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install python3.9 python3.9-venv

# Update pip:
curl https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py | sudo python3.9
```

Since we're installing a specific version of Python, your VM will default to using `python3.9` as the name of the Python binary.  Therefore, instead of running `python` or `python3`, run `python3.9` followed by your commands.


## Step 2: Running your `requirements.txt`

After installing `python3.9`, clone your CS 240 repository onto your virtual machine to get your copy of mp5.  Once you have your MP5:

- Go into your `mp5` directory,
- Install the python dependencies using `pip install -r requirements.txt` (this is the same command you used in your `Dockerfile`)


## Step 3: Run your services as a background task

Finally, you need to launch both the `courses-microservice` and your MP5 service as background tasks.  From working with `Dockerfile`, you can run them in tba background by adding an `&` at the end of the command.

Once both services are running, you should be able to connect to your microservice from any machine with the UIUC network (or via a VPN connection).  You should leave your service running until (at least) Thursday morning so Natalia or I can connect to it! :)

